Add random ray support (#1305)
neams-th-coe/cardinal: doc/content/vv/s2_thermal_expansion.md

# Griesheimer and Kooreman Analytic Benchmark

## Problem Description

This test case models the benchmark problem proposed in [!cite](s2_thermal_expansion),
which verifies coupled neutronics, heat conduction, and thermal expansion.
The problem consists of a 1D multiplying slab where neutrons are restricted to travel
along either $\hat{\Omega} = (-1, 0, 0)$ or $\hat{\Omega} = (1, 0, 0)$, and vacuum boundary
conditions are applied at $x = \pm L/2$ (where $L$ is the deformed length of the slab). The
S@2@ neutron transport equation may be written as a neutron diffusion equation under these
constraints:

!equation id=transport_eq
\frac{d}{dx}\left(\frac{1}{\Sigma_{t}(x)}\frac{d\phi(x)}{dx}\right) + \left(\lambda - 1\right)\Sigma_{t}(x)\phi(x) = 0\text{,}

with the following Marshak boundary condition:

!equation id=transport_bc
\frac{d\phi(x)}{dx} + \Sigma_{t}(x)\phi(x),\,\,\,\, x = \pm \frac{L}{2}\text{.}

> $\phi(x)$ is the scalar neutron flux (cm^-2^ s^-1^). $\Sigma_{t}(x)$ is the total cross

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\phi(x)$ is the scalar neutron flux (cm$^{-2}$ $s^{-1}$). $\Sigma_{t}(x)$ is the total cross
```

> section (cm^-1^), which has an inverse dependence on temperature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section (cm$^{-1}$), which has an inverse dependence on temperature:
```

!equation id=total_xs
\Sigma_{t}(x) = \Sigma_{t,0}\frac{T_{0}}{T(x)}\text{,}

where $T_{0}$ is the reference temperature of the slab (K) and $T(x)$ is the slab temperature (K).
$\lambda$ is the combined scattering and k-eigenvalue fission source:

!equation id=lambda
\lambda = \frac{1}{k_{eff}}\nu\frac{\Sigma_{f}}{\Sigma_{t}} + \frac{\Sigma_{s}}{\Sigma_{t}}\text{,}

where $k_{eff}$ is the k-eigenvalue, $\nu$ is the average number of neutrons released per
fission reaction, $\Sigma_{f}/\Sigma_{t}$ is the fractional probability of a fission
reaction and $\Sigma_{s}/\Sigma_{t}$ is the fractional probability of a scattering reaction.
Both reaction probabilities are constant over the length of the slab. $\Sigma_{t,0}$ is defined
as:

!equation id=total_xs_0
\Sigma_{t,0} = \frac{N_{A}}{A}\rho_{0}\sigma_{t,0}\text{,}

> where $N_{A}$ is Avogadro's number, $A$ is the molar mass of the slab (g mol^-1^), $\rho_{0}$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $N_{A}$ is Avogadro's number, $A$ is the molar mass of the slab (g mol$^{-1}$), $\rho_{0}$
```

> is the unheated slab density (g cm^-3^), and $\sigma_{t,0}$ is the reference microscopic total

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is the unheated slab density (g cm$^{-3}$), and $\sigma_{t,0}$ is the reference microscopic total
```

> cross section (cm). The neutron flux solution is normalized to a chosen power $P$ (eV s^-1^):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cross section (cm$^2$). The neutron flux solution is normalized to a chosen power $P$ (eV s$^{-1}$):
```

!equation id=normalization
P = \int_{-L/2}^{L/2}q\Sigma_{t}(x)\phi(x)\,dx

where $q$ is the energy released per neutron interaction (eV). The temperature distribution in the
slab is governed by the following heat conduction equation:

!equation id=conduction
\frac{d}{dx}\left(\kappa(x)\frac{d T(x)}{dx}\right) + q\Sigma_{t}(x)\phi(x) = 0\text{,}

with the following convection boundary condition:

!equation id=conduction_bc
\kappa(x)\frac{dT(x)}{dx} + h\left(T(x) - T_{0}\right),\,\,\,\, x = \pm \frac{L}{2}\text{.}

> $\kappa(x)$ is the thermal conductivity of the material (eV s^-1^ cm^-1^ K^-1^), which has a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\kappa(x)$ is the thermal conductivity of the material (eV s$^{-1}$ cm^${-1}$ K^${-1}$), which has a
```

linear dependence on temperature:

!equation id=thermal_conduct
\kappa(x) = \kappa_{0}T(x)

> where $\kappa_{0}$ is the reference thermal conductivity (eV s^-1^ cm^-1^ K^-2^). $h$ is a convective heat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $\kappa_{0}$ is the reference thermal conductivity (eV s$^{-1}$ cm$^{-1}$ K${^-2}$). $h$ is a convective heat
```

> transfer coefficient (eV s^-1^ cm^-2^ K^-1^). The final set of physics considered in this problem is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transfer coefficient (eV s$^{-1}$ cm^${-2}$ K${^-1}$). The final set of physics considered in this problem is
```

thermal expansion, where the differential slab length $\ell(x)$ (cm) expands according to the local
thermal strain $\epsilon_{x}(x)$:

!equation id=length
\ell(x) = \ell_{0}(1 + \epsilon_{x}(x))\text{,}

!equation id=thermal_strain
\epsilon_{x}(x) = \int_{T_{0}}^{T(x)}\alpha(\tau)\, d\tau\text{,}

> where $\ell_{0}$ is the initial slab length, and the linear expansion coefficient $\alpha(T)$ (K^-1^) is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $\ell_{0}$ is the initial slab length, and the linear expansion coefficient $\alpha(T)$ (K${^-1}$) is:
```

!equation id=linear_expansion
\alpha(T) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2T_{0}T(x)}}\text{.}

Mass is conserved by ensuring that the following expression is satisfied:

!equation id=mass_conservation
\rho(x)\ell(x) = \rho_{0}\ell_{0}\text{.}

## Analytical Solutions

The analytical solutions to the coupled problem were derived by [!cite](s2_thermal_expansion)

> under the assumption that the temperature and neutron flux fields are proportional to each other.

Reviewer 2: it's not really an assumption per se, it is a valid analytic solution

> under the assumption that the temperature and neutron flux fields are proportional to each other.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
under the ansatz that the temperature and neutron flux fields are proportional to each other.
```

To ensure this assumption is not violated, $\sigma_{t,0}$ and $h$ are manufactured based on other
benchmark parameters. For details regarding the derivation of the benchmark solution, readers
are referred to [!cite](s2_thermal_expansion).

The analytic solutions for the neutron flux ([neutron_flux_sln]), temperature ([temperature_sln]),
and power density ([q_dot_sln]) can be found below:

!equation id=neutron_flux_sln
\phi(x) = \phi(0)\sqrt{1 - \frac{(\lambda - 1)P^2 x^2}{L^2 q^2 \phi^2(0)}}\text{,}

!equation id=temperature_sln
T(x) = \frac{q \Sigma_{t,0} T_{0} L}{P}\phi(x)\text{,}

and

!equation id=q_dot_sln
\Sigma_{t}(x)\phi(x)q = \frac{P}{L}\text{.}

The neutron flux in the center of the slab ($\phi(0)$) is arbitrary, and is therefore considered

> a benchmark parameter. The slab eigenvalue can be calculated with [lambda_sln]:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an input setting. The slab eigenvalue can be calculated with [lambda_sln]:
```

!equation id=lambda_sln
\lambda = \frac{1}{2}\left(1 + \sqrt{1 + \frac{16 q^2 \phi^2(0)}{P^2}}\right)\text{,}

and the expanded slab length can be calculated with [length_sln]:

!equation id=length_sln
L = \sqrt[3]{\left(\frac{L_{0}}{_2F_1\left(1/4,1/2,3/2,1/\lambda\right)}\right)^{4}\left(\frac{\frac{q^2 \phi^2(0)}{P(\lambda - 1)} - \frac{P}{4}}{\kappa_{0}T_{0}^2(1 - 1/\lambda)}\right)}\text{,}

where $_2F_1(a,b,c,d)$ is the Gauss hypergeometric function. The manufactured benchmark parameters are
calculated with [manufactured_sigma] and [manufactured_h]:

!equation id=manufactured_sigma
\sigma_{t, 0} = \frac{1}{M\rho_{0}T_{0}}\sqrt{\frac{P}{\kappa_{0}L(\lambda - 1)}}\text{;}

!equation id=manufactured_h
h = \left(\sqrt{\frac{L(\lambda - 1)}{\kappa_{0}P}} - \frac{2T_{0}}{P}\right)^{-1}\text{.}

To ensure positivity of the solution, the power must be chosen such that:

!equation id=power_constraint
P \geq \frac{\lambda \kappa_{0}T_{0}^2}{L(\lambda - 1)}\text{.}

> The cannonical parameters of the benchmark proposed by [!cite](s2_thermal_expansion) can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The canonical parameters of the benchmark proposed by [!cite](s2_thermal_expansion) can be
```

found in [benchmark_params]. These parameters result in an expanded slab length of $L = 106.47$
cm and a slab k-eigenvalue of $k_{eff} = 0.29557$.

!table id=benchmark_params caption=Thermal expansion benchmark parameters proposed in [!cite](s2_thermal_expansion).
| Parameter | Value |
| :- | :- |
| $\rho_{0}$ | $1.2$ (g cm^-3^) |
| $L_{0}$ | $100$ (cm) |
| $A$ | $180$ (g mol^-1^) |
| $T_{0}$ | $293$ (K) |
| $q$ | $1\times 10^{8}$ (eV) |
| $P$ | $1\times 10^{22}$ (eV s^-1^) |
| $\kappa_{0}$ | $1.25\times 10^{19}$ (eV s^-1^ K^-2^) |
| $\phi(0)$ | $2.5\times 10^{14}$ (cm^-2^ s^-1^) |
| $\nu\Sigma_{f}/\Sigma_{t}$ | $1.5$ |
| $\Sigma_{s}/\Sigma_{t}$ | $0.45$ |

## Cardinal Multi-Group Monte Carlo Results

> [!cite](eltawila_thermo) used the Griesheimer and Kooreman problem benchmark problem to verify Cardinal's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[!cite](eltawila_thermo) used the Griesheimer and Kooreman benchmark problem to verify Cardinal's
```

> thermomechanic-neutronics coupling to OpenMC. Those benchmark results requried substantial modifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thermomechanical-neutronics coupling to OpenMC. Those benchmark results required substantial modifications
```

> thermomechanical-neutronics coupling to OpenMC. Those benchmark results required substantial modifications

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
thermomechanical-neutronics coupling to OpenMC. Those benchmark results required small modifications
```

Reviewer 2: IMO the changes were not really substantial, but if you want to keep original wording that is fine by me

to OpenMC's multi-group Monte Carlo solver to enable S@2@ neutron transport, precluding the inclusion of
input files in Cardinal's regression suite. Readers interested in these results are referred to

> [!cite](eltawila_thermo) for more information.

Reviewer 2: Suggest to add 1-2 sentences describing the major takeaways - did Cardinal do well with this benchmark? How well?

## Cardinal Random Ray Solutions

The Griesheimer and Kooreman problem is solved in Cardinal using [!ac](TRRM) in a similar manner to the
multi-group Monte Carlo approach presented in [!cite](eltawila_thermo). The neutronics domain is

> discretized into 200 slab regions, which are further subdivided into 31 tetrahedral elements per

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
discretized into 200 regions, which are further subdivided into 31 tetrahedral elements per
```

Reviewer 2: "slab" is used in the name of the benchmark, so didn't want it to be confused

> slab subregion (for a total of 6200 flat source regions). The conversion to tetrahedral elements is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
region (for a total of 6200 flat source regions). The conversion to tetrahedral elements is
```

necessary to use on-the-fly geometry skinning in Cardinal for material deformation.
Unfortunately, this conversion introduces non-physical source region gradients in

> the y and z direction which bias the [!ac](TRRM) solution. It is important to note that this bias

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the y and z directions which bias the [!ac](TRRM) solution. It is important to note that this bias
```

only exists for solutions using [!ac](TRRM); multi-group Monte Carlo solutions in Cardinal do not

> experience any solution bias as the fission source is continuous. 100 inactive batches are used to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experience any bias as the fission source is continuous. 100 inactive batches are used to
```

converge the scattering and fission sources, and 100 active batches are used to accumulate tally results.
An inactive ray length of $150$ cm is used to ensure rays reach a vacuum boundary condition (to
remove initialization bias), which is followed by an active length of $7500$ cm. Temperature
feedback is implemented by interpolating a cross section grid with a spacing of $1$ K.

The neutronics model is coupled with a heat conduction and thermal expansion solver from the MOOSE
Heat Transfer module in an identical manner to the approach presented in [!cite](eltawila_thermo).
Temperatures and displacements are solved on a 1D mesh with linear Lagrange basis functions. A
quasi-static finite strain formulation is used, and a time derivative is included in the temperature
model to act as physics-based relaxation. The solution is iterated between neutronics and thermomechanics
with Picard iterations; it is considered to be converged when the relative difference between neutronics

> field variables between Picard iterations is less then $10^{-8}$. The resulting flux and temperature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
field variables between Picard iterations is less than $10^{-8}$. The resulting flux and temperature
```

distributions can be found in [gk_rr_200].

!media gk_rr_200.png
  id=gk_rr_200
  caption=Scalar flux and temperature distributions predicted with [!ac](TRRM) in Cardinal.
  style=width:100%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;halign:center

The impact of the y-z induced source region gradients can be seen in the flux solution, resulting in
reasonable (but not perfect) agreement with [neutron_flux_sln]. The thermomechanics problem uses a true

> 1D mesh, resulting in better agreement between the numerical temperature predictions with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1D mesh, resulting in better agreement between the numerical temperature predictions and
```

quasi-static finite strain formulation is used, and a time derivative is included in the temperature
model to act as physics-based relaxation. The solution is iterated between neutronics and thermomechanics
with Picard iterations; it is considered to be converged when the relative difference between neutronics
field variables between Picard iterations is less than $10^{-8}$. The resulting flux and temperature
distributions can be found in [gk_rr_200].

!media gk_rr_200.png
  id=gk_rr_200
  caption=Scalar flux and temperature distributions predicted with [!ac](TRRM) in Cardinal.
  style=width:100%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;halign:center

The impact of the y-z induced source region gradients can be seen in the flux solution, resulting in
reasonable (but not perfect) agreement with [neutron_flux_sln]. The thermomechanics problem uses a true
1D mesh, resulting in better agreement between the numerical temperature predictions and
[temperature_sln]. The [!ac](TRRM) solution predicts $k_{eff} = 0.29520$ ($\Delta k_{eff} = −37$ pcm)
and an expanded slab length $L = 106.47$ cm. It is expected that the agreement in both the flux

> and eigenvalue solutions will improve when hexahedral element support is added to the [MoabSkinner.md],

Reviewer 2: add an issue number to track this? or some other way to come back to this sentence when @meltawila adds the hex support to avoid confusing the reader
